---
title: "Difference between MQTT and HTTP"
date: 2025-03-06
categories:
  - backend
tags:
  - communication_protocol
  - mqtt
  - http
---

# Overview

During my internship at a serving robot company, I noticed that several systems in our robot were using MQTT rather than the more familiar HTTP I had previously used in web development.
This sparked my curiosity about why robots and IoT devices tend to favor MQTT over HTTP.
This article aims to explore the key differences between MQTT and HTTP and their strengths & weaknesses, ultimately learning when to use which protocol.

# What is MQTT?

MQTT stands for **M**essage **Q**ueuing **T**elemetry **T**ransport.
It uses **TCP** connections for reliability to assur delivery and packet error checking, fragmentation and ordering, etc.

It is designed for the IoT, and basically using **Publish-Subscribe Model**.

- Publish-Subscribe Model
  - **Publishers** send message to topics without knowing who will receive them
  - **Subscribers** express interest in topics without knowing who publishes to them
  - **Broker** serves as the central hub that receives all messages from publishers and routes them to the appropriate subscribers

Each client establishes a connection to broker, and it publishes or subscribes to a specific **TOPIC**.

One of the most important characteristics of MQTT is that **once a connection established, it remains open throughout the session**.
So after establishing a connection, any number of messages can be sent through it in both directions.

A MQTT message has a specific commands, also called control packets or message types.
Here are the key MQTT commands:

- **CONNECT**: Sent by a client to establish a connection with the broker
- **PUBLISH**: Sent by clients or brokers to deliver application messages
- **SUBSCRIBE**: Sent by clients to request subscription to topics
- **DISCONNECT**: Sent by client to indicate clean disconnection

Also, MQTT introduced a concept of **Qualify of Service**(QoS) to address the challenges of reliable message delivery in unreliable network environments.

- Quality of Service (QoS)
  - **QoS 0**(At most once): Fire and forget
  - **QoS 1**(At least once): Ensures message delivery, but duplicates may occur
  - **QoS 2**(Exactly once): Gurantees message delivery exactly once, without duplication

# What is HTTP?

HTTP stands for **H**yper **T**ext **T**ransfer **P**rotocol.

It is the foundation of data communication on the World Wide Web, and basically using **Request-Response model**.

- Request-Response Model
  - **Clients**(usually web browsers) initiate requests to servers
  - **Servers** process requests and return appropriate responses

In this model, mostly each request requires a new connection setup. (After HTTP/1.1, **keep-alive** is introduced to keep connection alive but mostly for short time.)
And communication is resource-oriented, with **URLs** used to specifically identify and address resources.

HTTP clients can make 4 request type like below.

- **GET**: Retrieve data from the server
- **Post**: Submit data to be processed
- **PUT**: Update existing resources
- **DELETE**: Remove specified resources

# Differences between MQTT and HTTP

|                      | MQTT                                                       | HTTP                                                        |
| -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Architecture         | Publish-Subscribe                                          | Request-Response                                            |
| Command targets      | Topics                                                     | URLs                                                        |
| Underlying Protocol  | TCP/IP                                                     | TCP/IP                                                      |
| Messaging Mode       | Asynchronous, event-based                                  | Synchronous                                                 |
| Message Queueing     | The broker can queue messages for disconnected subscribers | Application needs to implement                              |
| Message Overhead     | 2 bytes minimum, Head data can be binary                   | 8 bytes minimum, Header data is text (compression possible) |
| Message Size         | 256MB maximum                                              | No limit but 256MB is beyond normal use cases anyway        |
| Content Type         | Any (binary)                                               | Text (Base64 encoding for binary)                           |
| Message distribution | One to Many                                                | One to One                                                  |
| Reliability          | Quality of Service 0, 1, 2                                 | Has to be implemented in the application                    |

Let's deep dive into more detailed differences between MQTT and HTTP.

## Architecture

- **MQTT**: Publish-Subscribe model where publishers and subscribers don't need to know about each other. A broker handles message routing.
- **HTTP**: Request-Response model requiring direct client-server communication.

## Addressing

- **MQTT**: Hierarchical topics (e.g., `device/sensor/temperature`) with wildcard support.
- **HTTP**: URLs to identify specific resources on servers.

## Messaging Mode

- **MQTT** Asynchronous and event-driven; clients receive updates automatically when events occur.
- **HTTP**: Synchronous; clients must request data and wait for responses.

## Message Queueing

- **MQTT**: Built-in queueing for offline clients in broker; messages can be stored and delivered when clients reconnected.
- **HTTP**: No native queueing; must be implemented separately at the application level.

## Efficiency

- **MQTT**: Minimal overhead(2 bytes minimum) and binary format optimized for constrained environments.
- **HTTP**: Larger headers(8 bytes minimum) and text-based format that consumes more bandwidth.

## Message Distribution

- **MQTT**: One-to-Many; a single message can reach multiple subscribers efficiently.
- **HTTP**: One-to-One; server must handle each client request separately.

## Reliabiliy

- **MQTT**: Three built-in QoS levels providing different delivery guarantees.
- **HTTP**: Reliability must be implemented at the application level.

# Performance between MQTT and HTTP in IoT

There was an example of performance between MQTT and HTTP in Google IoT core.

## TCP Message Overhead

| Action                         | MQTT Bytes     | HTTP Bytes |
| ------------------------------ | -------------- | ---------- |
| **Establish connection**       | 5,572          | 2,261      |
| **Disconnect**                 | 376 (optional) | 0          |
| **For each message published** | 388            | 3,285      |
| **Sum for 1 message**          | 6,336          | 5,546      |
| **Sum for 10 messages**        | 9,829          | 55,460     |
| **Sum for 100 messages**       | 44,748         | 554,600    |

For establishing connections, MQTT requires larger bytes. It's because MQTT CONNECT packet exchange after the TCP connection is completed.
But once the connection of MQTT is established, it requires smaller bytes when processing multiple messages than HTTP since HTTP requires a new connection for every request.

## Response Time

| # of messages in a connection cycle for mqtt | MQTT average response time per message (ms) (QoS 1) | HTTP average response time per message (ms) |
| -------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| 1                                            | 113                                                 | 289                                         |
| 10                                           | 47                                                  | 289                                         |
| 100                                          | 43                                                  | 289                                         |

MQTT shows decreasing response time as the number of messages increases. This is actually expected result since it uses same TCP connection and reuse it for multiple messages.

But I was wondering why HTTP has even longer response time for the 1 message because MQTT has bigger CONNECTION packet than HTTP so I assumed it should have longer response time than HTTP.
After several searches, I reached to this conclusions.

- Protocol Overhead in HTTP: HTTP requires more process like header parsing, status code processing.
- Handshake in HTTP: HTTP requires not only TCP connection, but also HTTP level handshake.

# Conclusion

## Proper Use Case for MQTT

- **IoT and Robotics** where power and bandwidth are limited
- **Real-time communication** requiring immediate updates
- **Multiple message exchanges** over the same connection
- **Unreliable networks** with intermittent connectivity
- **Bidirectional communication** between devices

## Proper Use Case for HTTP

- **Web-based applications** integrating with browsers
- **RESTful API designs** with clear resource structures
- **One-Time Transactions** where connection overhead isn't a concern

After learning about the differences between MQTT and HTTP, I realized why our company was using MQTT for several services.
It definitely has more advanteges in telemetry compare to HTTP in perspective of performance and reliability.

Also, after watching the performance test results, I realized how important to use a proper protocol for each use cases.
